The Blessing of El-Ahrairah
By Richard Adams

Long ago, Frith made the world. He made all the stars, too, and the world is
one of the stars. He made them by scattering his droppings over the sky and
this is why the grass and the trees grow so thick on the world. Frith makes
the rivers flow. They follow him as he goes through the sky, and when he
leaves the sky they look for him all night. Frith made all the animals and
birds, but when he first made them they were all the same. The sparrow and the
kestrel were friends and they both ate seeds and flies. And the fox and the
rabbit were friends and they both ate grass. And there was plenty of grass and
plenty of flies, because the world was new and Frith shone down bright and
warm all day.

Now, El-ahrairah was among the animals in those days and he has many wives. He
has so many wives that there was no counting them, and the wives had so many
young that even Frith could not count them, and they ate the grass and the
dandelions and the lettuces and the clover, and El-ahrairah was the father of
them all.

And after a time, the grass began to grow thin and the rabbits wandered
everywhere, multiplying and eating as they went.

Then Frith said to El-ahrairah, 'Prince Rabbit, if you cannot control your
people, I shall find ways to control them. But El-ahrairah would not listen
and he said to Frith, "My people are the strongest in the world, for they
breed faster and eat more than any of the other people. And this shows how
much they love Lord Frith, for of all the animals they are the most responsive
to his warmth and brightness. You must realize, my lord how important they are
and not hinder them in their beautiful lives.

Frith could have killed El-ahrairah at once, but he had a mind to keep him in
the world, because he needed him to sport and jest and play tricks. So he
determined to get the better of him, not by means of his own great power but
by means of a trick. He gave out that he would hold a great meeting and that
at that meeting he would give a present to every animal and bird, to make each
one different from the rest. And all the creatures set out to go to the
meeting place. But they all arrived at different times, because Frith made
sure that it would happen so. And when the blackbird came, he gave him his
beautiful song, and when the cow came, he gave her sharp horns and the
strength to be afraid of no other creature. And so when their turn came, the
fox and the stoat and the weasel. And to each of them Frith gave the cunning
and the fierceness and the desire to hunt and slay and eat the children of
El-ahrairah. And so they went away from Frith full of nothing but hunger to
kill the rabbits.

Now all this time El-ahrairah was dancing and mating and boasting that he was
going to Frith's meeting to receive a great gift. And at last he set out for
the meeting place. But as he was going there, he stopped to rest on a soft,
sandy hillside. And while he was resting, over the hill came flying the dark
swift, screaming as he went 'News! News! News!' For you know, this is what he
has said ever since that day. So El-ahrairah called up to him and said, 'What
news?' 'Why,' said the swift, 'I would not be you, El-ahrairah. For Frith has
given the fox and the weasel cunning hearts and sharp teeth, and to the cat he
has given silent feet and eyes that can see in the dark, and they are gone
away from Frith's place to kill and devour all that belongs to El-ahrairah."
And he dashed on over the hills. And at that moment El-ahrairah heard the
voice of Frith calling, 'Where is El-ahrairah? For all the others have taken
their gifts and gone and I have come to look for him.'

Then El-ahrairah knew Frith was too clever for him and was frightened. He
thought that the fox and the weasel were coming with Frith and he turned to
the face of the hill and began to dig. Hu dug a hole, but he has dug only a
little of it when Frith came over the hill alone. And he saw El-ahrairah's
bottom sticking out of the hole and the sand flying out in showers as the
digging went on. When he saw that, he called out, 'My friend, have you seen
El-ahrairah, for I am looking for him to give him my gift?' 'No,' answered
El-ahrairah, without coming out, 'I have not seen him. He is far away, He
could not come.' So Frith said, 'Then come out of that hole and I will bless
you instead of him,' 'No, I cannot,' said El-ahrairah, 'I am busy. The fox and
the weasel are coming. If you want to bless me you can bless my bottom, for it
is sticking out of the hole.'

Then Frith felt himself in friendship with El-ahrairah, because of his
resourcefulness, and because he would not give up even when he thought the fox
and the weasel were coming. And he said, 'Very well, I will bless your bottom
as it sticks out of the hole. Bottom, be strength and warning and speed
forever and save the life of your master. Be it so!' And as he spoke,
El-ahrairah's tail grew shining white and flashed like a star; and his back
legs grew long and powerful and he thumped the hillside until the very beetles
fell off the grass stems. He came out of the hole and tore across the hill
faster than any creature in the world. And Frith called after him,
'El-ahrairah, your people cannot rule the world, for I will not have it
so. All the world will be your enemy, Prince With A Thousand Enemies, and
whenever they catch you, they will kill you. But first, they must catch you,
digger, listener, runner, prince with the swift warning. Be cunning and full
of tricks and your people shall never be destroyed.' And And El-ahrairah knew
then that although he would not be mocked, Frith was still his friend.

And every evening, when Frith has done his day's work and lies calm and easy
in the red sky, El-ahrairah and his children and his children's children come
out of their warren and feed and play in his sight, for they are his friends,
and he had promised then that they can never be destroyed.
